# Customer-Segmentation-using-instacart-dataset

Globalization has remarkably improved customer segmentation by connecting users and  retailers around the world. Retailers can now collect information and know about their  customer base as technological advancements have made it easy for each of the party to look  for their own benefits; for example, retailers can now not only rely on traditional methods like  Recency, Frequency and Monetary (RFM) analysis, they can also opt for advanced customer  segmentations techniques using machine learning.  

The research aims to analyse Instacart’s dataset, which contains over 3.4 million orders by  customers. The project uses the data mining methodology, CRISP DM wherein it follows  exploratory data analysis that includes data cleaning, feature engineering and data  visualization. The machine learning techniques used are clustering, more specifically, KMeans, Fuzzy C-Means, elaborative clustering, Gaussian mixture models (GMM), and  dimensionality techniques like PCA, t-SNE, UMAP and a deep learning method,  Autoencoders.  

The model is looped through all the values of K wherein the ideal number of clusters are  decided on evaluation metrics including Silhouette score, Davis Bouldin index (DBI), and  Calinski-Harabasz index (CHI). The project implements all the clustering methods  independently, followed by coupling those with the dimensional techniques. For each case,  evaluation metric courses are computed and compared against each other to identify the best  suited model through setting a benchmark.  

Moving forward, cluster profiles are formed where standard statistical analysis is conducted to  classify users based on their behaviour. A cluster can delineate distinct consumer behaviour,  such as active shoppers, variety seekers, consistent shoppers, unstable shoppers, et cetera.  The project also employs churn prediction where churn is calculated based on the users who  did not order after a span of 30 days and thus are likely to churn using a supervised machine  learning algorithm called eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XG-boost).  Lastly, the thesis sheds light on most suitable model for Instacart data set and shows the churn  prediction to highlight the numerous consumer behaviours needed to be studied in customer  segmentation.
